Benjamindannegard/x8 waves tutorial (#539)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/04.pro/boards/portenta-x8/tutorials/waves-fleet-managment/content.md

---
title: 'Using FoundriesFactory Waves Fleet Management'
description: 'Learn how to use Foundries.io Factory fleet management tool Waves to manage multiple Portenta X8 devices'
difficulty: intermediate
tags:
  - Embedded Linux
  - Flashing
  - Foundries.io
author: 'Benjamin Dannegård'
hardware:
  - hardware/04.pro/boards/portenta-x8
---

## Overview

> In a production environment it is convenient to plan updates, and have control over when and which devices are updated. FoundriesFactory Waves is the feature for this. It allows you to easily define a group of Portenta X8s and then push updates to that specific group. This tutorial will show you how to define that group and how to construct a Wave that can then be pushed to a group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a production environment it is convenient to plan updates, and have control over when and which devices are updated. FoundriesFactory Waves is the feature for this. It allows you to easily define a group of Portenta X8s and then push updates to that specific group. This tutorial will show you how to define that group and how to construct a Wave that can then be pushed to a group.
```
Please also include information on how this differs from standard updates (waves promote targets to production by double signing them, which makes the updates more manageable/controllable).

## Goals

- Learn how to use Waves fleet manager
- Learn how to assign a target to a Wave
- Learn how to push a Wave to a group of devices

### Required Hardware and Software

- USB-C to USB-A or USB-C to USB-C
- Portenta X8
- Arduino Create account
- Arduino Pro Cloud Subscription. [Learn more about the Pro Cloud](https://www.arduino.cc/pro/hardware/product/portenta-x8#pro-cloud).
- Foundries.io account (linked with the Pro Cloud subscription)

> - FoundriesFactory® ([Check the Getting Started tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/out-of-the-box))
> - Devices already attached to your factory ([Check the Getting Started tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/out-of-the-box))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- FoundriesFactory® ([Check the Getting Started tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/out-of-the-box))
- Devices already attached to your factory ([Check the Getting Started tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/out-of-the-box))
```
A suggestion here is to include the Getting Started tutorial as a pre requirement for this wave tutorial.

    
## Instructions

### Setting Up the Terminal

> Waves fleet management requires us to have the X8 setup with a FoundriesFactory. If you have not done this please take a look our other tutorial [Getting Started tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/out-of-the-box), it will walk you through how to set up the X8 with your FoundriesFactory. To use Waves we also need to have fioctl installed and configured, you can follow this guide [here](https://docs.foundries.io/latest/getting-started/install-fioctl/index.html) for setting up fioctl. Creating waves and device groups will be done via the host, which is your factory, so the following commands will be in a terminal using fioctl connected to your FoundriesFactory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Waves fleet management requires us to have the X8 setup with FoundriesFactory. If you have not done so, please follow our [Getting Started tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/out-of-the-box),  as it will walk you through setting up the X8 with your Factory. To use Waves, you need to have fioctl installed and configured. Follow this [guide](https://docs.foundries.io/latest/getting-started/install-fioctl/index.html) to do so. Creating Waves and device groups will be done via the host, which is your factory. As such, the following commands will be entered in a terminal using fioctl  to connect to your Factory.
```

### Rotating Our Keys

> For security purposes we recommend that you rotate the keys of your FoundriesFactory. Rotation of the key will convert the root role's online-key, generated during the bootstrap of a Factory, to an offline key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For security purposes we recommend that you rotate the keys of your FoundriesFactory. Rotation of the key will convert the root role's online-key, generated during the bootstrap of a Factory, to an offline key.
```
Please add this link for more information here: https://docs.foundries.io/latest/reference-manual/security/offline-keys.html

> For security purposes we recommend that you rotate the keys of your FoundriesFactory. Rotation of the key will convert the root role's online-key, generated during the bootstrap of a Factory, to an offline key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For security purposes, we recommend that you rotate your FoundriesFactory keys. Rotation of the key will convert the root role's online-key, which was generated during the bootstrap of your Factory, to an [offline key](https://docs.foundries.io/latest/reference-manual/security/offline-keys.html).
```

> First we will rotate the root keys. These are the most important keys, they can be used to create new target keys. We will rotate them with this command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First we will rotate the root keys. These are the most important keys, as they can be used to create new target keys. Rotate them with the command:
```

```
fioctl keys rotate-root --initial /absolute/path/to/root.keys.tgz
```

> Now we can rotate the target only keys. With this command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we can rotate the target only keys with:
```

```
fioctl keys rotate-targets /absolute/path/to/root.keys.tgz
```

> And finally we copy the target keys to root using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And finally, for security reasons, we separate the target keys from root using:
```

```
fioctl keys copy-targets /absolute/path/to/root.keys.tgz /path/to/target.only.key.tgz
```

Now we can move on to creating our Wave.

### Creating the Wave

> 

Reviewer: The initial wave must be:
fioctl wave init -k $PATH_TO_KEY populate-targets <version> <tag>
fioctl wave complete populate-targets
Please check: https://docs.foundries.io/latest/reference-manual/ota/production-targets.html

> The command below will create a wave that can then be pushed to our devices. To create a Wave we will have to sign it with a key, here we will use the targets only key. Then we can give the wave a name, target number and tag. The `target number` needs to correspond to the target that we want the wave to contain for our devices. The `tag` can be set as production or development. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The command below will create a Wave that can then be pushed to our devices. To create a Wave, we will sign it with a key, here we will use the targets only key. Then we give the Wave a name, target number, and tag. The `target number` needs to correspond to the target that we want the Wave to contain for our devices. The `tag` can be set as production or development. 
```

```
fioctl wave init -k /absolute/path/to/targets.only.key.tgz <wave-name> <target number> <tag>
```

> And then we can complete the wave by calling this function with the waves name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And then we can complete the Wave by passing the name to the "complete" function:
```

```
fioctl wave complete <wave-name>
```

> Or we can cancel it if we wish with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or we can cancel it with:
```

```
fioctl waves cancel <wave name>
```

> When you create the wave you should be able to see it on your factory page. Here it should also be marked as complete once you call the wave complete command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After creating the Wave, you should see it on your Factory page. It should also be marked as complete after you call the Wave complete command.
```

![The wave page on your FoundriesFactory](assets/foundriesfactory-waves-page.png)

### Create the Device Group

> With this command we create our group. We give it a name and we can also give it a short description. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this command, we create our group, giving it a name and a short description:
```

```
fioctl config device-group create <group name> <"short description here">
```

Now to assign a device to our group we use:
```
fioctl device config group <device name> <group name>
```

> On your FoundriesFactory page you can sort devices by group on the device page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On your FoundriesFactory device page you can sort and view devices by group.
```

![Device group sorting on the FoundriesFactory page](assets/foundriesfactory-device-group.png)

> And now to rollout our wave to our device group we use:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To rollout our Wave to our device group, use:
```

For security purposes, we recommend that you rotate your FoundriesFactory keys. Rotation of the key will convert the root role's online-key, which was generated during the bootstrap of your Factory, to an [offline key](https://docs.foundries.io/latest/reference-manual/security/offline-keys.html).

First we will rotate the root keys. These are the most important keys, as they can be used to create new target keys. Rotate them with the command:
```
fioctl keys rotate-root --initial /absolute/path/to/root.keys.tgz
```

Now we can rotate the target only keys with:
```
fioctl keys rotate-targets /absolute/path/to/root.keys.tgz
```

And finally, for security reasons, we separate the target keys from root using:
```
fioctl keys copy-targets /absolute/path/to/root.keys.tgz /path/to/target.only.key.tgz
```

Now we can move on to creating our Wave.

### Creating a Dummy Wave for Production Targets

Before a Factory can start doing production OTAs, an initial production Targets file must be created. More information can be found [here](https://docs.foundries.io/latest/reference-manual/ota/production-targets.html). This can be done by creating a dummy wave with the command:
```

> fioctl wave init -k /absolute/path/to/targets.only.key.tgz <wave-name> <target number> <tag>
> ```
> We can use `populate-targets` as the Wave name. The `target number` needs to correspond to a target that exists in our Factory. The `tag` should be set as `production`. Then complete the Wave with:

Reviewer: I believe the other parameters are not needed for the initial wave.
```suggestion
fioctl wave init -k /absolute/path/to/targets.only.key.tgz populate-targets
Then complete the Wave with:
```

```

> fioctl wave  complete populate-targets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fioctl wave complete populate-targets
```

### Creating a Wave

Now we can start creating our Wave. The command below will create a Wave that can then be pushed to our devices. To create a Wave, we will sign it with a key, here we will use the targets only key. Then we give the Wave a name, target number, and tag. The `target number` needs to correspond to the target that we want the Wave to contain for our devices. The `tag` can be set as production or development.
```
fioctl wave init -k /absolute/path/to/targets.only.key.tgz <wave-name> <target number> <tag>
```

And then we can complete the Wave by passing the name to the "complete" function:
```
fioctl wave complete <wave-name>
```

Or we can cancel it with:
```
fioctl waves cancel <wave name>
```

After creating the Wave, you should see it on your Factory page. It should also be marked as complete after you call the Wave complete command.

![The wave page on your FoundriesFactory](assets/foundriesfactory-waves-page.png)

### Create the Device Group

With this command, we create our group, giving it a name and a short description:
```

> fioctl config device-group create <group name> <"short description here">

Reviewer 3: I would use camelCase, and the quotes outside our `<>` description 
```suggestion
fioctl config device-group create <groupName> "<shortDescription>"
```

Reviewer 3: Addressed at 6acc599, got approved
